Add rasterix (#5)
xarray-contrib/xarray-indexes: docs/earth/raster.md

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  name: python
---

# rasterix: RasterIndex

````{grid}
```{grid-item}
:columns: 3
```{image} https://rasterix.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_static/rasterix.png
---
alt: Alt text
width: 200px
align: center
---
```
```{grid-item}
:columns: 9
```{seealso}
Learn more at the [Rasterix](https://rasterix.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) documentation page.
```
````

## Highlights

Rasterix provides a RasterIndex that allows indexing using a functional transformation defined by an _affine transform_.

It uses {py:class}`~xarray.indexes.CoordinateTransformIndex` as a building block. In doing so,

1. RasterIndex eliminates an entire class of bugs where Xarray allows you to add (for example) two datasets with different affine transforms (and/or projections) and return nonsensical outputs.

> 1. The associated coordinate variables are lazy, and use very little memory. Thus very large coordinate frames can be represented.

Author: that would be great!

Rasterix uses a function {py:func}`rasterix.assign_index`.

## Example

> Here is a TIFF file opened with rioxarray. TIFF files commonly do not contain explicit coordinate variables but contain an affine transform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a GeoTIFF file opened with rioxarray. GeoTIFF files *do not contain explicit coordinate arrays*, instead they commonly store the coefficients of an affine transform that software libraries use to calculate the coordinates.
```
